

===== PAGE 1 =====

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gits20
Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems
Technology, Planning, and Operations
ISSN: 1547-2450 (Print) 1547-2442 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gits20
Network-wide traffic signal control based on the
discovery of critical nodes and deep reinforcement
learning
Ming Xu, Jianping Wu, Ling Huang, Rui Zhou, Tian Wang & Dongmei Hu
To cite this article: Ming Xu, Jianping Wu, Ling Huang, Rui Zhou, Tian Wang & Dongmei
Hu (2019): Network-wide traffic signal control based on the discovery of critical nodes
and deep reinforcement learning, Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, DOI:
10.1080/15472450.2018.1527694
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15472450.2018.1527694
Published online: 03 Jan 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
View Crossmark data


===== PAGE 2 =====

Network-wide traffic signal control based on the discovery of critical nodes
and deep reinforcement learning
Ming Xu a, Jianping Wu a, Ling Huang b, Rui Zhou c, Tian Wang d, and Dongmei Hu a
aDepartment of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; bSchool of Civil Engineering and Transportation, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou, China; cTelecommunications Engineering with Management, International School, Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China; dE-commerce and Law, International School, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
ABSTRACT
To improve the traffic efficiency of city-wide road networks, we propose a traffic signal con-
trol framework that prioritizes the optimal control policies on critical nodes in road net-
works. In this framework, we first use a data-driven approach to discover the critical nodes.
Critical nodes are identified as nodes that would cause a dramatic reduction in the traffic
efficiency of the road network if they were to fail. This approach models the dynamic of
road networks using a tripartite graph based on the vehicle trajectories and can accurately
identify the city-wide critical nodes from a global perspective. Second, for the discovered
critical nodes, we introduce a novel traffic signal control approach based on deep reinforce-
ment learning; this approach can learn the optimal policy via constantly interacting with the
road network in an iterative mode. We conduct several experiments with a transportation
simulator; the results of experiments show that the proposed framework reduces the aver-
age delay and travel time compared to the baseline methods.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 29 November 2017
Revised 18 September 2018
Accepted 20 September 2018
KEYWORDS
critical node; deep
reinforcement learning;
traffic signal controller;
tripartite graph
Introduction
The optimization of traffic signal control is an import-
ant and interesting problem in the community of
intelligent transportation system. Numerous studies
have been done to develop various traffic signal strat-
egies for improving traffic efficiency. A major branch
of existing methods is to utilize reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) that attempt to learn an optimal policy func-
tion using a trial and error process (Abdulhai, Pringle,
& Karakoulas, 2003; Aziz, Zhu, & Ukkusuri, 2018;
Balaji, German, & Srinivasan, 2010; El-Tantawy,
Abdulhai, & Abdelgawad, 2014;G r /C19egoire, Desjardins,
Laum^onier, & Chaib-Draa, 2007; Lu, Liu, & Dai, 2008;
Richter, Aberdeen, & Yu, 2007; Steingrover, Schouten,
Peelen, Nijhuis, & Bakker, 2005; Walraven, Spaan, &
Bakker, 2016). However, applying RL to traffic signal
control in a large-scale urban area still poses two diffi-
culties: (1) a large number of the traffic states and (2)
a number of signal control actions that expands expo-
nentially with the number of considered intersections.
For the first difficulty, deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) (Casas, 2017; Gao, Shen, Liu, Ito, & Shiratori,
2017; Genders & Razavi, 2016; Jeon, Lee, & Sohn,
2017; Li, Lv, & Wang, 2016; Mnih et al., 2015;
Mousavi, Schukat, Corcoran, & Howley, 2017; van der
Pol & Oliehoek, 2016) that uses a deep neural net-
work trained by RL to approximate the optimal policy
function is proposed. DRL can learn a traffic state
space representation, which can improve the general-
ization in dealing with the complexity of road network
dynamics. However, DRL does not consider how to
reduce the scale of the action space. For the second
difficulty, several studies (Khamis & Gomaa, 2014;
Kuyer, Whiteson, Bakker, & Vlassis, 2008; Pham
et al., 2013; Ozan, Baskan, Haldenbilen, & Ceylan,
2015) propose multi-agents reinforcement learning
(MARL) methods to reduce the size of signal control
action space. With these methods, each agent controls
a signalized intersection, and each agent can commu-
nicate with its neighboring agents to coordinate their
control actions. However, most of their communica-
tions are based on a pre-determined protocol with a
message passing process; that is, to obtain an optimal
coordination, agents need to communicate with other
agents many times until their local messages are fully
CONTACT Ling Huang hling@scut.edu.cn School of Civil Engineering and Transportation, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
/C2232018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
https://doi.org/10.1080/15472450.2018.1527694

===== PAGE 3 =====

exchanged. This leads to a slower computation as the
number of agents increases. Another disadvantage of
these methods is the enormous economic cost.
Therefore, MARL is difficult to expand to a large-scale
road network.
Several studies (L €ammer, Gehlsen, & Helbing, 2006;
Li, Jiang, Rui, & Havlin, 2014; Qian, Wang, Xue,
Zeng, & Wang, 2015) reveal that the phenomenon of
cascading failures in road networks is ubiquitous. This
finding means that when several critical nodes fail, a
large number of nodes will also fail as a result of the
connection between the nodes, and the entire road
network may collapse. From this phenomenon, the
following questions naturally arise. If only a small
number of nodes can be managed and controlled for
limited resources and capital, which nodes do we
select and what control strategies are applied on the
selected nodes to achieve a better performance of the
road network?
To answer this question and to expand on previous
studies, we propose a novel traffic signal control
framework that can be applied to a large-scale area,
even a city-wide road network. First, this framework
uses a data-driven method to identify the critical
nodes in the road network. The advantage of this
method over previous methods is that it integrates
four important factors to rank the node importance,
including (1) the traffic capacity, (2) centrality, (3)
irreplaceability of a node and (4) spatial relationships
among neighboring nodes. From an economic per-
spective, we give the priority to optimal signal control
strategies of the several critical nodes under the condi-
tion of limited capital. Second, motivated by studies
of deep recurrent Q-networks (DRQN) (Hausknecht
& Stone, 2015; Justesen, Bontrager, Togelius, & Risi,
2017; Lample & Chaplot, 2017), the proposed frame-
work introduces a novel method based on DRQN
to control the signals of critical nodes. This method
uses a long short term memory (LSTM) to learn
an optimal policy by interacting with the “SUMO”,
an open-source traffic simulator. Compared with
DRL, DRQN can effectively sense the road network
dynamics by inputting a time series of traffic informa-
tion. Experiments validate the effectiveness of
this framework.
Framework
As shown in Figure 1 , the proposed framework can be
divided into two phases: discovery of critical nodes
and signal control policy learning.
Discovery of critical nodes
In this phase, CRRank (Xu et al., 2018) is used.
Differing from other methods based on topology ana-
lysis (Batista & Bazzan, 2015; Niu, Li, Niu, Zhang, &
Liu, 2015; Park & Yilmaz, 2010; Scardoni &
Laudanna, 2013; Wu, Gao, & Sun, 2007), CRRank
exploits the geographic information of the road net-
work and the real massive vehicle trajectories, which
can be easily collected via vehicle-mounted GPS devi-
ces. Due to the noise, the GPS points often deviate
from the real road segments, the component of map
matching is needed to transform each GPS reading in
each trajectory to its corresponding road segment.
In addition, to obtain the origin-destination-pair
(OD-pair) information, the urban map is partitioned
into disjoint regions with high-level road segments
using a component of region partition. Based on the
regions and processed trajectories, the trip informa-
tion of all of the vehicles is modeled using a tripartite
graph, which consists of three types of nodes: OD-
pair, path and intersection. Next, CRRank is con-
ducted on the tripartite graph to rank importance of
each intersection. However, in the experimental phase,
the framework uses a simulated trajectory dataset gen-
erated by SUMO, instead of real trajectories.
Signal control policy learning
According to the geographic information and investi-
gated traffic flow distribution, a simulated road
network is modeled and fed into SUMO. Each critical
intersection is controlled by a DRQN model inde-
pendently. Meanwhile, other intersections are config-
ured with fixed interval signal timing. In the training
phase, Each DRQN model continuously interacts with
Figure 1. Framework of the proposed method.
2 M. XU ET AL.

===== PAGE 4 =====

SUMO to learn the optimal policy of signal control
via a trial and error process. In each turn, DRQN
receives a sequence of traffic states and sends a signal
control action to SUMO and receives the reward of
an action from SUMO.
Methodologies
CRRank
An intuitive view is that the nodes with the high flow
are important. However, recent studies (Wu et al.,
2007; Zou, Wu, Gao, & Xu, 2014) found that the
importance of a node is determined by the combin-
ation of its flow and betweenness, rather than any one
of them. In addition, we found the irreplaceability of
the paths and the spatial relationship between neigh-
boring nodes were also useful. Specifically, the conges-
tion of the downstream node has the potential to
cause the congestion of the upstream node. Therefore,
to accurately estimate the importance of nodes,
we use CRRank that considers all the aforementioned
factors. First, CRRank extracts information of flow
distribution and path selection of drivers from vehicle
trajectories and introduces a novel concept, the trip
network, which reflects the dynamics of road network.
The trip network can be modeled using a bidirectional
tripartite graph represented formally by G’(E[P[V,
X[Y), as shown in Figure 2 , where E, P and V repre-
sent the sets of nodes corresponding to the OD-pairs,
paths, and intersections, respectively; the weighted
matrixes are represented by X and Y, which are
described in greater detail later. Second, CRRank
ranks the node importance via score propagation over
the tripartite graph.
To implement the score propagation, each type of
nodes is assigned a meaning score that is updated
during each iteration. In particular, we use OD-load
vector L to represent the load on the road network
caused by each OD-pair; vector H represents the
popularity of each path, and vector C represents the
importance of each intersection. Intuitively, the OD
pair with a larger flow will likely place a heavier load
on the road network, the path with a larger flow is
likely more popular, and the intersection linking the
higher-level roads is likely more important. To inte-
grate such prior knowledge, CRRank defines three
profile vectors L
ð0Þ, Hð0Þ and Cð0Þ, which represent the
initial score lists of the OD-load, path popularity and
intersection importance, respectively. These profile
vectors are given as
L
0ðÞ ¼ f1P
ifi
f2P
ifi
/C1/C1/C1fjEjP
ifi
"#
; (1)
H 0ðÞ ¼ d1P
idi
d2P
idi
/C1/C1/C1djPjP
idi
"#
; (2)
C 0ðÞ ¼ d1P
idi
d2P
idi
/C1/C1/C1djVjP
idi
"#
; (3)
where fe is the traffic flow of the OD-pair e, dp is the
size of flow on the path p and di ¼P
jrij; in this
equation, rij is the level score of the jth road segment
linking the intersection i. If the road segment is an
expressway, freeway or arterial road, the value of r is
set to 1.1, if the road segment is a sub-arterial road, r
is set to 1.0 and if the road segment is a bypass, r is
set to 0.9. The final scores for all node types can be
synchronously calculated with the weighted matrixes
iteratively. The weighted matrixes between E and P,
denoted by X
E⟶;P and XP⟶;E, are given as
XE!P
ep ¼
dp
fe
if OD pair e select path p
0 otherwise
8
<
: (4)
XP!E
pe ¼ 1 if path p is selected by OD pair e
0 otherwise
/C26
(5)
Also, the weighted matrixes between P and V,
denoted by YP⟶;Vand YV⟶;P, are given as
YP!V
pv ¼ upv þ rpvðÞ c 0ðÞ
v ; (6)
YV!P
vp ¼ uvph 0ðÞ
p ; (7)
where cð0Þ
v is the vth entry of the vector Cð0Þ, hð0Þ
p is
the pth entry of the vector Hð0Þ and upv denotes the
connectivity between p and v. Specifically, if p
Figure 2. Tripartite graph of the trip network.
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 3

===== PAGE 5 =====

traverses v, upv equals 1; otherwise upv equals 0; rpv is
used to model the impact on the upstream intersec-
tion from the downstream intersection. The r of the
first intersection in each path is set to “0”. For simpli-
city in simulation, CRRank sets rpv ¼ rpv‘ þ 0:01, in
this equation, v’ is the last upstream intersection in p.
However, in fact, rpv should be modeled as a function
of distance between the downstream and upstream
intersection. The score propagation in CRRank con-
sists of a forward phase and a reverse phase. In the
forward phase, H and C are updated as the following:
H ¼ a X
E!P½/C138 T
L þ 1/C0 aðÞ H 0ðÞ ; (8)
C ¼ a YP!V½/C138 T
H þ 1/C0 aðÞ C 0ðÞ ; (9)
where a is the damping factor and is set to 0.85 like
PageRank (Brin and Page, 1998). In the reverse phase,
H and L are updated as the following:
H ¼ a YV!P½/C138 T
C þ 1/C0 aðÞ H 0ðÞ ; (10)
L ¼ a XP!E½/C138 T
H þ 1/C0 aðÞ L 0ðÞ : (11)
The forward phase and the reverse phase are alter-
nated until convergence, which reflects the mutually
reinforcing relationships among the OD-load, path
popularity and intersection importance as follows: an
OD-pair with a heavy load is likely to choose several
or only one popular path. A popular path is likely to
be chosen by an OD-pair with a heavy load; similarly,
a popular path is likely to traverse many important
intersections. An important intersection is likely to be
traversed by many popular paths. To ensure conver-
gence, L, H and C are normalized by L ¼ L=L, H ¼
H=H and C ¼ C=C after each iteration. In CRRank,
the significant factors of critical nodes are naturally
integrated into the calculation process, including traf-
fic capacity, centrality, irreplaceability of nodes and
impact among the neighboring nodes.
Proposed DRQN
On each critical intersection discovered by CRRank,
an approximation of optimal policy function for signal
control is obtained using a deep recurrent Q-network.
In this subsection, we describe in detail the compo-
nents of the proposed DRQN.
Model
In RL, at each time step t, an agent observes a state
s
ðtÞ 2 S, and chooses an action aðtÞ 2 A according to a
policy p, which needs to be learned through interact-
ing with the environment. The objective of p is to
maximize its expected discount reward
R tðÞ ¼
Xþ1
t¼0
ct ; (12)
where R(t) is the reward that the agent receives after
performing action a(t); c is the discount factor. The
Q-function is used to estimate how good it is to per-
form an action in a given state under a policy p;
therefore, it is the action-value function for policy p.
Q
/C3 s; aðÞ ¼ E
s' r tþ1ðÞ þ c max
a'
Q/C3 s'; a'
/C16/C17
js; a
"#
: (13)
In DQN, the neural network with parameters h,
denoted by Q(s, a; h), is used to approximate to Q-
function. In addition, it is natural to think that Q(s, a;
h) can be learned by minimizing the following
squared TD-error l(h) with an iterative update,
‘i hðÞ ¼ E r þ c max
a'
Q/C3 s'; a'; hi/C0 1
/C16/C17
/C0 Qs ; a; hiðÞ
 ! 2
2
4
3
5;
(14)
where i is the serial number of current iteration. At
each iteration, the parameters hi are updated as
hi ¼ hi/C0 1 þ erhi/C0 1 ‘i/C0 1 hi/C0 1ðÞ : (15)
To optimize loss function ‘ðhÞ, the parameters hi/C0 1
from previous iteration should be kept unchanged at
the current iteration i. Using DQN in the signal con-
trol problem, a disadvantage is that a single observa-
tion or a fixed number of observations cannot
accurately reveal the dynamics of traffic situation.
This shortcoming is observed because the trend in the
traffic situation of a road is usually determined by
that of its neighboring roads at an earlier time and
DQN cannot remember the historical information
beyond the current input. To solve this problem, we
introduce a DRQN (presented in Figure 3 ) that uses
Figure 3. Framework of the proposed DRQN.
4 M. XU ET AL.

===== PAGE 6 =====

an LSTM to approximate the Q function. DRQN cap-
tures the view of traffic flow at current time step with
a hidden state and integrates hidden states across
multiple time steps to make decision on the next
action. Specifically, at each time step, DRQN receives
a traffic observation as input. At each s time steps,
DRQN outputs an action and later receives a reward.
Here, we set s ¼ 8.
State space
Due to the advantage of a deep neural network in
learning representation of data, the state space should
reflect the view of road network dynamics as com-
pletely as possible. In this paper, we assume that an
agent can observe the actions and local traffic situ-
ation of its neighboring intersections, as well as its
local traffic situation. The observations of an agent at
each time step is composed of five vectors
m
g wg mn wn zhi , where mg and wg are the vectors
for the number of vehicles and average speed on each
lane linking the controlled intersection, respectively,
mn and wn are the vectors of the number of vehicles
and average speed on each lane linking each neighbor
of the controlled intersection, respectively, and z is
the signal state vector of the controlled intersection
and its neighbors.
Action space
An agent chooses an action from the set of available
actions at a regular interval according to its observa-
tions. In general, traffic signals refer to three color
phases, green signal allows the vehicles to go through
the intersection, yellow signal warns the vehicles to
slow down for the coming red signal, and red signal
prohibits any vehicle from proceeding. In general, the
possible settings of signal phases are East-West Green
(EWG), East-West Left-turn Green (EWLG), North-
South Green (NSG) and North-South Left-turn Green
(NSLG). A naïve method is to consider each color set-
ting of signal phases as an action. However, this step
does not conform to the typical traffic signal control
conventions and may cause traffic chaos. To be safe,
the sequence of setting signal phases should be in
loop mode, i.e., /C1/C1/C1 !EWG ! EWLG ! NSG !
NSLG ! EWG ! /C1/C1/C1. Therefore, we give only two
possible actions as {N, A}, where N represents keeping
current signal phase unchanged; A represents making
the transition from current signal phase to the next.
In addition, a yellow phase spanning three seconds is
added before the signal transition from green to red,
which is not treated as an action for DRQN and auto-
matically executes by traffic signal control system.
Reward function
The reward is to reflect the effect of an action on the
environment. To achieve optimal signal control, a
naïve approach is to define the reward r(t) as the
average delay of all of the vehicles on the involved
road segments, given by
r tðÞ ¼ 1
Nt
XNt
i¼1
ki; (16)
where Nt is the number of vehicles on the linked road
segments at current time t, and ki is the waiting time
of vehicle i. However, such a reward may lead to
excessive awaiting time of minority drivers. That pos-
sibility means that, to minimize the vehicle delays
from a global perspective, DRQN may tend to keep
the signal of the lanes with heavy traffic as green,
while the red signal phases of other lanes with small
traffic are extended for a longer time. To prevent this
situation, the reward r(t), inspired by the well-known
link congestion function in transportation planning
developed by U.S. Bureau of Public Roads (Wu et al.,
2007; Wu, Gao, Sun, & Huang, 2006), is defined as
r tðÞ ¼ 1
Nt
XNt
i¼1
g 1/C0 ki
C
/C18/C19 q"#
; (17)
where C represents tolerable waiting time; g and q are
constants. Here, we set C ¼ 60, g ¼ 0.15 and q ¼ 2.
Algorithm 1. DRQN for signal control.
————————————————————————————
Input: Replay memory D with size M the number of
training episodes N
Output: the parameters h of Q-network
————————————————————————————
1. Initialize the parameters h of Q-network, h~ of
target network
2. Initialize replay memory D with size M
3. for each episode e do
4. Initialize a simulation episode
5. for t:¼1 to MAXTIME do
6. select an action at with e –greedy strategy
7. execute at in SUMO and get reward rt and
next state stþ1
8. end for
9. for t: ¼ 1 to MAXTIME - s do
10. for k: ¼ t to t þ s do
11. append ( st, at, rt, stþ1) to sequence l
12. end for
13. put sequence l into D
14. end for
15. sample random mini-batch of sequences
from D
16. for k: ¼ s þ 1 to 1, /C0 1 do
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 5

===== PAGE 7 =====

17. if sk is terminal then
18. yk :¼ rk
19. else yk :¼ rk þ c max
a0Qðskþ1; a0; hÞ
20. end if
21. accumulate gradients for yk/C0 Qs k; ak; /C24h
/C0/C1/C16/C17 2
22. end for
23. hiþ1 :¼ hi þ erh‘ hðÞ
24. /C24hiþ1 :¼ /C24hi þ /C24eh iþ1/C0 /C24hi
/C0/C1
25. end for
Experiments and evaluation
In this section, we describe the experiments conducted
in SUMO to evaluate the performance of the proposed
approach. SUMO is deployed on a 64-bit server
with 32-cores 3.2 GHz CPU and a 128 GB memory.
We develop a proxy layer to be in charge of inter-
section between deep neural networks and SUMO.
Specifically, the proxy layer receives the action com-
mands from the DRQNs, carries out these actions in
batches, then reads the states and rewards from
SUMO and returns them to DRQNs. The deep neural
networks are developed using TensorFlow library and
deployed on a workstation with an NVIDIA Geforece
GTX 1080 Ti of 11 GB memory.
We generate four distinct scales synthetic road
networks with 20 nodes, 50 nodes and 100 nodes,
respectively, in SUMO. The duration of each simulation
episode is 3600 time steps. We assume that the probabi-
lity of vehicles arriving follows a Poisson process.
Discovery of critical nodes
We trace each vehicle in each simulation and record its
trajectories in the database. Based on the trajectory data,
we build the tripartite graph to identify the critical nodes.
To evaluate the effectiveness of prioritizing an
optimal control strategy of critical nodes, we compare
CRRank with three baseline algorithms, the flow-
based algorithm (FA) calculating the importance
score of a node according only to its traffic flow,
the betweenness-based algorithm (BA) calculating the
importance score of a node according only to its
betweenness centrality (Kirkley, Barbosa, Barthelemy,
& Ghoshal, 2018), and randomly choosing nodes
(RC). We implement DRQN-based signal control
algorithm on the top ten nodes in the results of RC,
FA, BA and CRRank, respectively. Figure 4 shows the
results of this experiment. Overall, the average travel
time is declining with the increase of the numbers
of the nodes controlled by DRQN. In the 20-node
Figure 4. The relation between the average travel time and the cumulative number of critical nodes.
6 M. XU ET AL.

===== PAGE 8 =====

network, the downward trends of all the four algo-
rithms are very close. However, we observed that in
the 50-node network and 100-node network, the con-
trol of the randomly selected nodes using DRQN has
a smaller impact on the improvement of the traffic
efficiency, FA performs slightly better than BA and
CRRank still performs best. This finding demonstrates
that prioritized control on the critical nodes with an
optimized strategy can improve the traffic efficiency
of road networks. Compared with the baseline
algorithms, CRRank has an advantage in identifying
the critical nodes on large-scale road networks.
Signal control policy learning
In this subsection, we evaluate the effectiveness of
DRQN, and we use the following baselines.
/C15 Fixed Signal Timing plan (FST) with each signal
phase of 30 seconds
/C15 Self-Organizing Traffic Lights algorithm ( SOTL)
(Cools, Gershenson, & D ’Hooghe, 2013) turning
the signal phase according to the elapsed time and
the number of vehicles in queues
/C15 Q-Learning (QL) representing the policy function
as a table
/C15 Deep Q-network (DQN) combining deep neural
network and Q-learning
The configurations of QL and DQN are the same
as DRQN, including the state space, action space, the
reward and the discount factor c. In each network, we
select the top 10 critical nodes as the controlled nodes
using CRRank. Figure 5 and Table 1 show the overall
performance of the five methods. As shown in
Figure 5 , for the three algorithms based on Q-learn-
ing, QL, DQN and DRQN, the average travel time
of all vehicles on all three networks decreases
as the number of simulation episodes increases. After
approximately 200 episodes, the models converge and
learn the signal control policies that improve the traf-
fic efficiency compared with the FST and SOTL. DQN
outperforms QL slightly, since QL requires discret-
ization of the traffic state space, which decreases the
accuracy, while DQN can sense the fine-grained traffic
situation with the advantage of deep learning. DRQN
performs best, which indicates that the hidden state of
LSTM capturing historical traffic information can
improve the policy.
Figure 5. The relation between the average travel time and the number of episodes.
Table 1. The average travel time of different scale networks
controlled by different algorithms (after convergence).
FST SOTL QL DQN DRQN
20 Nodes 196.3 166.4 173.8 146.8 117.5
50 Nodes 304.7 286.2 278.9 263.8 221.6
100 Nodes 497.1 476.3 448.0 412.5 379.8
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 7

===== PAGE 9 =====

To understand the difference between the proposed
reward function and the baseline reward defined in
formula (10), we implement both of them in DRQN,
and investigate the maximum delay defined as the
maximum waiting time of all of the vehicles in a
simulation episode. The waiting time of a vehicle is
the cumulative duration of speed less than 10 km/h.
Figure 6 shows the relationship between the max-
imum delay and the number of training episodes
using different rewards in the three networks. From
Figure 6 , we observe that the proposed rewards can
reduce the maximum delay to a certain extent as we
expected. This approach prevents several drivers from
blocking traffic for a quite long time and is of vital
importance to improve the travel experience.
Conclusions
This paper proposed a signal control framework to
improve the traffic efficiency of a large-scale road net-
work. To make the problem tractable, a small number
of critical nodes are preferred to control by optimal
strategies. First, to discover the critical nodes
from vehicle trajectories, we use CRRank, which ranks
node importance simultaneously considering capacity,
centrality, substitutability of a node, and spatial
relationships among neighboring nodes. Second, for
each critical node, we use an LSTM trained by RL to
learn an optimal signal control policy. The experi-
ments show that the proposed method outperforms all
of the baseline methods.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by
the authors.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. U1509205 and No.
51408237, and Toyota Research Center.
References
Abdulhai, B., Pringle, R., & Karakoulas, G. J. (2003).
Reinforcement learning for true adaptive traffic signal
control. Journal of Transportation Engineering , 129(3),
278–285.
Aziz, H. A., Zhu, F., & Ukkusuri, S. V. (2018). Learning-
based traffic signal control algorithms with neighborhood
information sharing: An application for sustainable
mobility. Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems ,
22(1), 40 –52.
Figure 6. The relation between the maximum cumulative delay and the number of episodes using different reward in DRQN.
8 M. XU ET AL.

===== PAGE 10 =====

Balaji, P. G., German, X., & Srinivasan, D. (2010). Urban
traffic signal control using reinforcement learning agents.
IET Intelligent Transport Systems , 4(3), 177 –188.
Batista, R. D. A., & Bazzan, A. L. C. (2015). Identification of
central points in road networks using betweenness centrality
combined with traffic demand. Polibits,( 5 2 ) ,8 5–91.
Brin, S., & Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale
hypertextual Web search engine. In P. H. Enslow & A. Ellis
(Eds.) WWW 1998. Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on World Wide Web (pp. 107 –117). Brisbane,
Australia: Elsevier Science Publishers B. V.
Casas, N. (2017). Deep deterministic policy gradient for
urban traffic light control. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1703.09035.
Cools, S. B., Gershenson, C., & D ’Hooghe, B. (2013). Self-
organizing traffic lights: A realistic simulation. In M.
Prokopenko (Ed.) Advances in applied self-organizing sys-
tems (pp. 45 –55). London: Springer.
El-Tantawy, S., Abdulhai, B., & Abdelgawad, H. (2014).
Design of reinforcement learning parameters for seamless
application of adaptive traffic signal control. Journal of
Intelligent Transportation Systems , 18(3), 227 –245.
Gao, J., Shen, Y., Liu, J., Ito, M., & Shiratori, N. (2017).
Adaptive traffic signal control: Deep reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm with experience replay and target network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02755.
Genders, W., & Razavi, S. (2016). Using a deep reinforce-
ment learning agent for traffic signal control. arXiv pre-
print arXiv:1611.01142.
Gr/C19egoire, P. L., Desjardins, C., Laum ^onier, J., & Chaib-
Draa, B. (2007, September). Urban traffic control based
on learning agents. In D. J. Dailey (Ed.), ITSC 2007.
Proceedings of the 10th International IEEE Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 916 –921). Seattle,
WA: IEEE.
Hausknecht, M., & Stone, P. (2015). Deep recurrent q-learn-
ing for partially observable MDPS. CoRR, abs/
1507.06527.
Jeon, H., Lee, J., & Sohn, K. (2017). Artificial intelligence
for traffic signal control based solely on video images.
Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems , 22, 1 –13.
Justesen, N., Bontrager, P., Togelius, J., & Risi, S. (2017).
Deep learning for video game playing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.07902.
Khamis, M. A., & Gomaa, W. (2014). Adaptive multi-
objective reinforcement learning with hybrid exploration
for traffic signal control based on cooperative multi-agent
framework. Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence, 29, 134 –151.
Kirkley, A., Barbosa, H., Barthelemy, M., & Ghoshal, G.
(2018). From the betweenness centrality in street net-
works to structural invariants in random planar graphs.
Nature Communications , 9(1), 2501.
Kuyer, L., Whiteson, S., Bakker, B., & Vlassis, N. (2008).
Multiagent reinforcement learning for urban traffic
control using coordination graphs. In W. Daelemans &
K. Morik (Eds.), ECML PKDD 2008. Proceedings of the
Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases
2008 (pp. 656-671). Antwerp, Belgium: Springer.
L€ammer, S., Gehlsen, B., & Helbing, D. (2006). Scaling laws
in the spatial structure of urban road networks. Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications ,3 6 3 ( 1 ) ,8 9–95.
Lample, G., & Chaplot, D. S. (2017). Playing FPS games
with deep reinforcement learning. In S. P. Singh, & S.
Markovitch (Eds.), AAAI-17. Proceedings of the 31th
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp.
2140–2146). San Francisco, CA: AAAI.
Lu, S., Liu, X., & Dai, S. (2008, June). Incremental multistep
Q-learning for adaptive traffic signal control based on
delay minimization strategy. In Y. Sun, X. Guo, J. He, et
al. (Eds.), WCICA 2008. Proceedings of the 7th World
Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (pp.
687–691). Chongqing, China: IEEE.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., … Hassabis, D. (2015). Human-
level control through deep reinforcement learning.
Nature, 518(7540), 529 –533.
Mousavi, S. S., Schukat, M., Corcoran, P., & Howley, E.
(2017). Traffic light control using deep policy-gradient
and value-function based reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.08883.
Niu, S. Y., Li, B., Niu, W. J., Zhang, J. S., & Liu, W. F.
(2015). Evaluation of highway network node importance
via node benefit function and weighted node between-
ness. In CICTP 2015 (pp. 2182 –2191).
Ozan, C., Baskan, O., Haldenbilen, S., & Ceylan, H. (2015).
A modified reinforcement learning algorithm for solving
coordinated signalized networks. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies , 54, 40 –55.
Park, K., & Yilmaz, A. (2010, April). A social network ana-
lysis approach to analyze road networks . Paper presented
at ASPRS 2010 Annual Conference, San Diego, CA.
Pham, T. T., Brys, T., Taylor, M. E., Brys, T., Drugan,
M. M., Bosman, P. A., & Steenhoff, D. (2013, May).
Learning coordinated traffic light control . Paper presented
at the 11th Adaptive and Learning Agents workshop (at
AAMAS-13), St. Paul, MN, USA.
Qian, Y., Wang, B., Xue, Y., Zeng, J., & Wang, N. (2015). A
simulation of the cascading failure of a complex network
model by considering the characteristics of road traffic
conditions. Nonlinear Dynamics , 80(1 –2), 413 –420.
Richter, S., Aberdeen, D., & Yu, J. (2007). Natural actor-
critic for road traffic optimisation. In J. C. Platt, D.
Koller, Y. Singer, & S. T. Roweis (Eds.), NIPS 2007.
Proceedings of the Advances in neural information process-
ing systems (pp. 1169 –1176). Vancouver, B.C., Canada:
Curran Associates.
Scardoni, G., & Laudanna, C. (2013). Identifying critical
road network areas with node centralities interference
and robustness. In In R. Menezes, A. Evsukoff & M. C.
Gonz/C19alez (Eds.), Complex networks (Vol. 424, pp.
245–255). Berlin: Springer.
Steingrover, M., Schouten, R., Peelen, S., Nijhuis, E., &
Bakker, B. (2005, October). Reinforcement learning of
traffic light controllers adapting to traffic congestion. In K.
Verbeeck, K. Tuyls, A. Now /C19e, B. Manderick & B. Kuijpers
(Eds.), BNAIC 2005, Proceedings of the 17th Belgium-
Netherlands Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp.
216–223). Brussels, Belgium: KVAB.
van der Pol, E., & Oliehoek, F. A. (2016). Coordinated deep
reinforcement learners for traffic light control . Paper
presented at the NIPS 2016 Workshop on Learning,
Inference and Control of Multi-Agent Systems,
Barcelona, Spain.
JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 9

===== PAGE 11 =====

Walraven, E., Spaan, M. T., & Bakker, B. (2016). Traffic
flow optimization: A reinforcement learning approach.
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , 52,
203–212.
Li, D., Jiang, Y., Rui, K., & Havlin, S. (2014). Spatial
correlation analysis of cascading failures: congestions and
blackouts. Scientific Reports , 4(4), 5381.
Li, L., Lv, Y., & Wang, F. Y. (2016). Traffic signal timing
via deep reinforcement learning. IEEE/CAA Journal of
Automatica Sinica , 3(3), 247 –254.
Wu, J. J., Gao, Z. Y., & Sun, H. J. (2007). Effects of the
cascading failures on scale-free traffic networks. Physica
A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications , 378(2),
505–511.
Wu, J. J., Gao, Z. Y., Sun, H. J., & Huang, H. J. (2006).
Congestion in different topologies of traffic networks.
Europhysics Letters , 74(3), 560.
X u ,M . ,W u ,J . ,L i u ,M . ,X i a o ,Y . ,W a n g ,H . ,&H u ,D .( 2 0 1 8 ) .
Discovery of critical nodes in road networks through mining
from vehicle trajectories. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems.d o i :10.1109/TITS.2018.2817282
Zou, Z., Wu, J., Gao, J., & Xu, X. (2014). Cascade defense
in urban road network by inserting modular topologies.
Kybernetes, 43(5), 750 –763.
10 M. XU ET AL.